Computer programmers design, develop, and test software. Software encompasses the programs and operating instructions used by any computing device. Your phone, a laptop, even an airplane, all contain software. Computer programmers ensure that the software adheres to best practices in performance, reliability, and security. This allows you to go about your daily tasks confident that your devices will behave as expected. 

First, they will work with others on their team to determine what software should be developed. This typically involves many iterations of design, development, and testing to ensure everything is working smoothly and as expected. Then, using their expertise, the computer programmer would write code that the computer can understand to handle the new functionality. However, programmers don't only get to write new programs. They often have to work on ensuring the health and reliability of existing programs. 

A week in the life

A computer programmer can be involved in many different activities on a typical day. To get a sense of what those activities include, let me take you through a typical week in the life. 

Starting with Monday. This is when we prepare for the week ahead. It involves meeting with our team to discuss this week's priorities. Many software companies deliver features to users one at a time. There's often a list of features and bugs that the team must prioritize. It's important to understand that one single programmer rarely develops software. We work as a team and need to agree on what each person will do to help achieve the goal of delivering a new feature to users. Once a programmer has their tasks for the week, they can begin researching and preparing to work on the feature. 

On to Tuesday. Once you've done your research for what you'll need to know to develop a new feature, you can begin to write new code. Writing new code often involves a lot of trial and error. This is where you put your critical thinking and problem-solving skills to use. You may consult with fellow programmers to get ideas on tackling particularly complex problems. 

Wednesday. You have the basic feature working partially. However, you run into several issues when attempting to run or execute your new code. This is where you will spend time debugging issues. Debugging is the process of finding and removing errors or bugs in your code. These bugs can cause your code to behave oddly or crash. Programmers have various methods available to them to debug their code. 

Thursday. You've spent time finding and fixing bugs in your new code. Now you're able to run it on your machine, hooray, but not so fast. When your coworker tries it out, they get a crash. Oh no. You missed handling a few scenarios that a real user might do with your code. So it's back to debugging the issues and writing tests to ensure you fixed it properly. Software tests are written using code. They verify that what you developed behaves correctly. It's one way programmers check their work.

Friday. This is where you can show your work to the rest of the team. They may have questions on why you took a particular approach or provide suggestions on how you can improve the new feature. More often than not, you'll also discover more bugs. This will require more debugging and testing on your part. The life of a programmer is never dull.
## The biggest challenges

Number one, naming. Some parents spend weeks, if not months, picking the perfect name for their child. They may want a unique name that reflects their culture or one they believe will make the child more successful in the future. But that's something they only have to do once. Programming involves naming things daily. When you write code, each class, file and variable can have a name. And the name matters. Naming is a form of communication. It helps convey the purpose of the code, what someone should expect it to do. This is as important as eventually, the code may need to be changed. Naming things properly will make them easier to read and understand. 

Number two, working with Legacy Code. You will find various definitions of Legacy Code online. The definition I prefer is code that you're afraid to change. Why might a programmer be afraid to change code? It could be that the code is not up to date with the latest software practices and design, the original programmer who developed it no longer works with the company and the code is too complicated to understand, there are no tests or the tests are insufficient to feel confident in making changes. Working with Legacy Code can be a real challenge for all of these reasons and more. 

Providing estimates. Very few programmers are good at estimating a task duration. The work we do is complex and often there are various unknowns. However, businesses need to know when their customers can expect to receive the new software or feature. This requires programmers to inform others how long they think it will take for them to complete a given task. Seems simple, no? Well, not quite. A programmer needs to take various factors into account when providing an estimate. How many total hours of coding will they have minus meetings and other tasks? What type of research is needed before coding this new feature? Will it be easy or difficult to write tests for this feature? Do they need to provide documentation for others? The answers to each of these questions will impact the final estimate. That's why software estimation is often referred to as an art. It takes time and experience to provide reasonable estimates to others. Don't let this scare you. Like any challenge, it's essential to be aware of them so that you can successfully face them all over time.

## Keeping your skills sharp

First and foremost, you are responsible for your career. Whether your current job provides you with exposure to new technologies, you must find the time to investigate what's trending in the industry. A straightforward way to do this is to subscribe to a newsletter

Newsletter that shares links to relevant industry topics. The most popular programming languages, frameworks, and industries have several that you can choose from. If you struggle with finding time to read, 

Podcasts that cover the latest in the industry. For example, if you're into cybersecurity, they have podcasts for that, mobile development, no problem. Podcasts have you covered. You name it, there's probably someone with a podcast about it. Besides that, you should also consider working on a side project. Side projects are simple programs that you develop to explore a new technology in your free time. 

Some programmers need their free time to completely disconnect from their computers. I respect that. But if you're the type who prefers to use it for learning, then a side project is the way to go. So far, we've talked about things you do on your own. 

Tech community. There are conferences, webinars, local events, and more in the tech community where you can join with other programmers to learn about new technologies together. These events typically provide an introduction and get you excited about exploring more. Sound like a lot? I'll be honest. Sometimes it can be, but at the end of it all, programming is about solving problems with technology. So if you keep your mind sharp and continue to think critically.